---
title: Yet another self-taught programmer success story
date: 2022-08-20
status: draft
slug: how-i-got-my-first-coding-job
category: Personal
dropcap: true
summary: How I got my first tech jobs without any tech credentials.
---

My first composition teacher once said to me that my goal as a composer should be to add distinction to the repertoire, not bulk. That anecdote doesn't really have anything to do with this essay, but more to do with the fact that enough articles and reddit posts and twitter threads have already been written by people who've broken into tech without any sort of tech background. All of those tales differ in subtle and important ways, however, and I'm hoping my entry into that storied tradition will reveal a hitherto unexplored niche.

I landed my first fulltime software development job in the summer of 2022 at the ripe old age of 33. I don't have an academic background in computer science, and I never attended a boot camp or took a single relevant class in my college years. Everything I learned came from free online tutorials (primarily [Codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-python-3){target="_blank"} and [freeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/2022/responsive-web-design/){target="_blank"}) and personal projects that I worked on in my spare time, with plenty of Google and Stack Overflow sprinkled in. I actually started writing this article shortly after getting that job but had to stop myself, because for every story like mine there is another about someone feeling out of their depth in a new field; I had to make sure that I could survive and thrive before feeling comfortable telling anyone how I accomplished this not-so-Herculean task.

After parlaying my two and a half years of experience at that first job into a fully remote mid-level position with a six-figure salary, I finally feel armed with enough knowledge of how to do just that. I also owe some measure of success to [@powerbottomdad1](https://x.com/powerbottomdad1){target="_blank"}, who wrote a [series of blog posts](https://lowlyswe.substack.com/p/my-experience-getting-a-tech-job){target="_blank"} detailing his journey into tech as a non-techie which inspired me to start applying to jobs after nervously skirting that arena for months. It's in that same spirit I will try to articulate how I made it where I am today, and how others might do the same.

## My Background (or lack thereof)

I went to school for music. I got my bachelor's degree in general music (with a focus on piano performance) and my master's degree in music composition. I taught a few adjunct courses after graduating and filled the rest of my time teaching piano privately, none of which was particularly lucrative. Academia never seemed to me an avenue worth pursuing given the glut of academics and dearth of academic jobs, and piano lessons were a total crapshoot; students would leave for weeks or months during summer vacation and wouldn't always resume lessons when school started in the fall, they would frequently cancel last minute and leave me twiddling my thumbs, and worst of all they would sometimes fail to pay on time or at all. There came a point where this lifestyle lost its luster and drove me to explore a career change.

The upside of teaching piano was the hours: most of my students were in grade school, so I wouldn't start teaching until around 4PM. This meant that I had all morning and early afternoon to do whatever I wanted, and at some point I decided to use that time to teach myself how to code (more on that later). I didn't have any relatives whose knowledge I could tap into (my dad is a social worker and my mom is an artist) and no money to pay for more schooling, so I embarked on this journey completely alone and in the dark.

Which is to say: if I can do it, literally anyone can.

## 🎵Take Me Out To The Code Game🎶

It all started with fantasy baseball. The year was 2018. I wasn't really looking to make a career change at this point in my life; I just wanted to win my highly-competitive (i.e., $50) fantasy baseball league. I had spent years at the bottom of the standings, getting nowhere by following the advice of "experts", so I endeavored to reverse my fortunes by creating a bespoke player evaluation system (pretty strong wording for what it actually is).

This is how I came to learn Python. I knew I needed to learn how to code to do what I wanted to do, and the internet kept telling me that Python was what I needed: it was beginner-friendly and, more importantly, data-centric. It's hard to say with the benefit of hindsight if this was the right choice or not, since most employers I saw on job sites were looking for Java and .NET developers. Regardless, Python is what I dove into and tried to master, using the Codecademy course linked above.

My goal was to automate the process of adding and removing players to and from my lineup using the algorithms that I created for evaluating players. Basically what I did was scrape my lineup and the available free agents from our league platform's website every morning with Selenium and BeautifulSoup and ran it all through various formulas I'd created to determine if there were any hitters on the market that had better match-ups that day than hitters on my team (this was a hitter-only process; I still managed pitchers manually). Any free agents with better daily match-ups were automatically added to my team after the player they were to replace was dropped.

I didn't start using this script until late that season, by which time it was far too late to come back from being near last place. However, I did make a push and finish several spots higher when all was said and done, and overall I felt not only a sense of accomplishment because of the script's marginal success but that coding was something I could do fulltime because of how satisfying it was creating a piece of software and watching it work its magic.

Luckily for me, an opening for a data scientist at a well known baseball website became available not long after I had done all this work. Following the conclusion of the 2019 MLB season, I saw this position open up via a twitter post and scrambled to put together an application. I wrote a short essay detailing my methodologies and crunched some numbers to show how "well" my script worked and sent it along with the full Python script. Before long, I had an interview and a job offer. Granted, this was a part-time position, but my foot was in the door.

## Getting Up to Speed

I don't know if getting this part-time role is what enabled all my future successes, but it certainly *feels* like it. Had I not, my résumé would've been nothing more than a few personal projects. The job also introduced me to things like version control and what an API is. When I started I didn't even know what a web developer really did or that backend and frontend developers were a thing, and I certainly didn't expect that I would eventually be transitioning into backend web development. It would be several more years before I felt comfortable trying to completely change the course of my life by moving away from music and into software development.

In the meantime, I got as good at "data science" as I could. I learned the pandas and NumPy libraries; scikit-learn and SciPy; matplotlib and seaborn; I learned about generalized additive models and Jupyter notebooks (totally unrelated things, I know). All of this was stuff I learned on my own, too; I completed several data science courses offered by IBM and Kaggle (and got cute, meaningless little certificates to boot), and I also bought a [Python textbook](https://www.amazon.com/Python-Programming-Introduction-Computer-Science/dp/1887902996){target="_blank"}, reading it cover-to-cover and doing every coding problem at the end of each chapter. I probably wouldn't have done any of this had I not gotten this job, so at the very least it instilled in me the drive to learn more and do a better job (otherwise I'd get fired, was the thought in my head).

I did all of this alongside my work tasks for about two years before my uncle came to me with a project: create a website where he could use his home-brewed formulas for betting on baseball games. This is where I discovered what a web developer's job looks like, specifically a fullstack developer. I built a backend server with Flask and taught myself HTML/CSS/JavaScript and how HTML templating works via jinja, after a few weeks of grinding I had a fully functioning site that my uncle was using to bet on live games. More than that, I had a new hobby horse: web development.

I took this experience and helped my artist mom build an e-commerce site where she could sell her paintings. She had been selling her artwork on Etsy for years but had grown disillusioned with their business model, so I took it upon myself to create a site for her from scratch (more as a learning experience for myself than something she could pivot to and abandon Etsy). This was another few weeks of grinding and learning the basics of CRUD applications (again using Flask and jinja), the end result being another fully functioning site (I say "fully functioning" slightly tongue-in-cheek because it's obviously not some major accomplishment, but for someone with no background it was *something*).

Fullstack development became fun for me after these projects, so I took a closer look at the frontend aspect and discovered React. I wasn't sure if I was going to try getting a job as a fullstack developer, but I figured it couldn't hurt my chances of getting a job by learning this massively popular JavaScript framework. Around the same time Wordle went viral, and it gave me the idea to make a game where players have to guess planes from pictures (extremely nerdy, but my dad is an aviation buff so I thought it'd be something fun for him and I to do). I found a free API for plane photos and built another Flask backend, but this time instead of serving jinja templates I created an API that my React frontend could hit. This was probably overkill, but it was a good way for me to learn that went well beyond basic tutorials. In the end I created [spottheplane.net](https://www.spottheplane.net/){target="_blank"}, and it was at this point that I felt it was time.

## The Big Break

I was teaching piano while doing all of this; I even got a gig playing piano at a tiny church in rural Ohio, because I was still trying to make ends meet. By the summer of 2022 I finally decided that I had done enough to start looking for fulltime software jobs in earnest. I'm not usually one to take charity or ask people for favors, so rather than try to leverage people from the baseball site for work I decided to cast my résumé to the wind (i.e., apply to jobs through Indeed.com).

I remember not being very hopeful, especially when the rejections started to roll in. I think I applied to something like 60 jobs, mostly within the area of northwest Ohio I was living in, and for a while I either didn't get a response or if I did get a response it was a rejection. A recruiter from one place reached out and wanted to set something up, but it seemed shady or at the very least unappealing. I don't remember how long I had to wait, but eventually I snagged an honest-to-goodness interview at a local manufacturing company with a small software team.

It's hard to overstate how excited I was by this. You have to remember, I had *no* money at this point in my life. I was living paycheck-to-paycheck in shitty studio apartments since moving out of my parent's house and had absolutely no prospects of getting out from under my student loans. So, while this potential job was near the bottom of the salary totem pole when it came to the software industry, it was miles better than what I was pulling in at the time. And since job offers weren't exactly pouring in, I had to nail this interview.

Which, I did. It was more of a vibe check than a technical interview (there weren't any technical questions at all, in fact), which worked extremely well in my favor. The head of the engineering department was the sort of guy to give a person like me a chance because he knew that I would be an easy person to get along and work with, which I later learned had been an issue for him in the past. This is probably the only "benefit" my teaching background provided me: an affable personality that gets along with everybody and is receptive of constructive criticism.

The two engineering managers also didn't seem to care that the only programming languages I were familiar with were Python and JavaScript, even though I was to be working with C#. A few days after the interview (that I felt went very well) I sent a follow-up email to the HR person, saying "thank you for the opportunity" and other superlatives; a day or so later, the offer came in. My heart-rate skyrocketed, my face went flush&mdash;I had finally made it.

## Coda

Life didn't suddenly slow down and get easier after this. In fact, I developed a sense of anxiety I had never felt even when I was completely broke. A small patch of hair on the back of my head disappeared for months. I had a hard time fitting in with my new coworkers right away and felt isolated and neglected for the first two months. The office, which had no windows, felt depressing and suffocating. I don't know how or when things began to take a turn for the better, but after passing my two-month review I started to loosen up. I became close friends with the two other developers on our team and was able to contribute meaningful code before long.

I'll probably write another post about how I navigated this new chapter in my life, as well as how I was able to take the next step towards a better job. What I hope people take away from this is that, yes, it's possible to get a job in software with literally no background (which isn't shocking news, I know). You don't even necessarily have to do a boot camp, all it takes is some body of work that you can discuss intelligently.
